Docs for Analytics Rules plugin [PAB-4742] (#3395)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin-bundle/getting-started.md

---
weight: 10

> title: Getting started with Analytics rules plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Getting started with the Analytics rules plugin
```

layout: redirect
outputs:
  - html
  - json
helpcontent:
- label: analytics-rules-plugin
  title: Analytics rules plugin
  content: "The Analytics rules plugin extends the capabilities of Analytics Builder within Streaming Analytics. It allows users to create, deploy, and manage Analytics Builder models directly from device and group contexts in applications like Device Management and Cockpit."
---

> ### What is Analytics Rules Plugin {#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What is the Analytics rules plugin {#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin}
```

Author: done

> Analytics rules plugin extends Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage analytics builder instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.

Reviewer 2: analytics builder **model** instances

Author: updated

> Analytics rules plugin extends Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage analytics builder instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Analytics rules plugin extends the Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage Analytics Builder instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.
```

Author: done

> For more details about Analytics Builder, please refer to [Analytics Builder](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#getting-started).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about Analytics Builder, refer to [Analytics Builder](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#getting-started).
```

### Prerequisites

Before using the Analytics rules plugin, ensure that the following requirements are met:

> - Tenant is subscribed to Streaming Analytics microservice that supports Analytics Builder capability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The tenant is subscribed to the Streaming Analytics microservice that supports the Analytics Builder capability.
```

> - Analytics rules plugin is installed to the desired application and feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Analytics rules plugin is installed in the desired application, and the feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` is enabled.
```

> - User privileges to access Analytics Builder models and create new instances of Analytics builder templated models. Please refer to the [Permissions](/streaming-analytics/introduction-analytics/#permissions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The user has the required privileges to access Analytics Builder models and create new instances of Analytics builder templated models. Refer to the [Permissions](/streaming-analytics/introduction-analytics/#permissions).
```

### Creating your first analytics rule

> This topic provides the basic workflow for creating your first analytics rule using the plugin from applications like Device Management. You will create a simple templated analytics model that creates an alarm when temperature breaches a given threshold value. The steps below require that at least one device is already registered in {{< product-c8y-iot >}}. Preferably, this device is already sending measurement values to {{< product-c8y-iot >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic provides the basic workflow for creating your first analytics rule using the plugin from applications like Device Management. You will create a simple templated analytics model that creates an alarm when the temperature breaches a given threshold value. The steps below require that at least one device is already registered in {{< product-c8y-iot >}}. Preferably, this device is already sending measurement values to {{< product-c8y-iot >}}.
```

The model that you add will contain three blocks:
- An input block which receives measurements from devices, groups, or assets.
- A threshold block which verifies the measurement has breached the threshold value.
- An alarm output block which creates an alarm object for specified devices, groups, or assets.

#### Step 1: Create an Analytics model

This section walks you through creating a simple temperature monitoring model. For more detailed Analytics Builder information, refer to the [Understanding models](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#understanding-models).

> 1. Open Streaming Analytics application and navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Models** page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the Streaming Analytics application and navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Models**.
```

> 2. On the toolbar, click **New Model**, enter a model name (for example, "Create alarm on threshold") and click **OK**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the top bar, click **New Model**, enter a model name (for example, "Create alarm on threshold") and click **OK**.
```

> 3. From the palette on the left, expand **Input** and drag the **Measurement Input** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

Reviewer: @nnat-nabu Please keep it simpler. For example, change
For **Fragment and Series**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**.
For **Fragment and Series**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown ...

Author: updated

   - For **Input Source**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter** <img src="/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/option-template-parameter.png" alt="Option for selecting a template parameter" style="display:inline-block; margin:0">, then give a name to the template parameter. Example "Measurement Source".
   ![Template parameter with From Context](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/select-tp-type.png)

   - For **Fragment and Series**, click the

>     value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a suitable name, example: **Input Fragment and Series**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a suitable name, example: "Input Fragment and Series".
```

Reviewer: Values that you select or enter are formatted in quotes.

   - For **Threshold Value**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example: "Threshold Value".
5. Expand **Output** and drag the **Alarm Output** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:
   - For **Output Destination**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then use the same template parameter given for **Input Source** of the "Measurement Input" block, example: "Measurement Source".
   - For **Alarm Type**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example:  "Alarm Type".
   - For **Message**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example: "Alarm Text".
   - For **Severity**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example: "Alarm Severity".
6. Connect the blocks by clicking and dragging between their ports (small circles on the sides of blocks):
   - Connect **Value** output of **Measurement Input** to **Value** input of **Threshold**
   - Connect **Breached** output of **Threshold** to **Create Alarm** input of **Alarm Output**

> 7. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input Source** of the **Measurement Input** block (example : "Measurement Source") has "Source or Destination" updated to include one or more values from the **Restrict to** dropdown (for example, Device) and set **Value Selection** to "From Context". Click **OK** to save the changes.

Reviewer 2: given that the "restrict to" dropdown is a new element, perhaps it would be useful to also include a screenshot of this one and additionally describe that this parameter then defines whether it is presented for devices/groups/assets/...

Author: Screenshot added and also added  the reference of "From context", "Restrict to" template parameter docs for more details. Screenshot of "Restrict to" is also added in the manage template parameter section of Analytics builder docs. please click Preview to check screenshots.

![Template parameter with From Context](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/template-parameter.png)

> For detailed information about creating and managing template parameters in Analytics Builder, refer to the [Managing Template Parameters documentation](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#managing-template-parameters).

Reviewer 2: did you also update the documentation for "managing template parameters"?
eg. the mechanism for optional is now different
+ might also be good to additionally explain the "restrict to" when "from context" is selected

Author: Yes, PR: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3420/files has the required changes but not merged yet. It has some dependency in the current PR.

Author: I merged the PR https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3420/files to this current PR. Now you could see the changes for "managing template parameters" in the current PR

> For detailed information about creating and managing template parameters in Analytics Builder, refer to the [Managing Template Parameters documentation](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#managing-template-parameters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For detailed information about creating and managing template parameters in Analytics Builder, refer to [Managing template parameters](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#managing-template-parameters).
```

8. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the model.

When completed, your model will look similar to this:

![Create model for alarms](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-alarm-model.png)

#### Step 2: Create an instance of model using Analytics rules plugin

> 1. Navigate to **Device Management** application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to Device Management application.
```

2. Go to **Devices** > **All devices** and select a device.
3. Click the **Analytics rules** tab (embedded as one of the device details tabs).

> Please refer to the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) section to ensure all requirements are met.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) section to ensure all requirements are met.
```

   ![Analytics rule tab](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/empty-analytics-rule.png)

> 4. Click **Add rule** to open the Add analytics rule dialog box. Since we are currently in the **Device** context, only models that have been configured with **From Context** template parameters restricted to **Device** will be visible here. Select your configured model and click **OK**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Click **Add rule** to open the **Add analytics rule** dialog. Since we are currently in the **Device** context, only models that have been configured with **From Context** template parameters restricted to **Device** will be visible here. Select your configured model and click **OK**.
```

   ![Add rule for the selected model](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/add-rule-for-selected-model.png)
5. Configure the rule parameters:
   - Optionally update the name or add a note if desired.

>    - Populate the template parameter values.

Reviewer 2: i would add some information/clarification that the "device" parameter is automatically set as it is derived from context --> users needs to get familiar with the concept of "context"

Author: added

   ![Create model from sample](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-model-from-sample.png)
3. The model editor opens with the sample model ready for use.

#### Step 2: Configure template parameters
1. Click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> in the toolbar.
2. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input Source** of the **Alarm Input** block (for example, "Device or group of devices") has "Source or Destination" updated to include one or more values from the **Restrict to** dropdown (for example, Device) and set **Value Selection** to "From Context". Click **OK** to save the changes.
3. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the model.

#### Step 3: Create rule from Device Management application
Follow the same steps as described in [Step 2: Create an instance of model using Analytics rules plugin](#step-2-create-an-instance-of-model-using-analytics-rules-plugin) above.

### Troubleshooting

1. **No models available in Add rule dialog**

>    - Ensure Analytics Builder models have template parameters configured with "From Context" value selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Ensure that the Analytics Builder models have template parameters configured with the "From Context" value.
```

Author: done

>    - Verify your current context matches the model's "Source or Destination" type restrictions.

Reviewer 2: see before: given that the "restrict to" is a new concept, maybe give an example to improve time-to-understanding

Author: added

2. **Previously created rules don't appear in the Analytics rules list**

>    - Verify Analytics instances are set to **Production mode** in the Analytics Builder instance editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Verify that the Analytics instances are set to **Production mode** in the Analytics Builder instance editor.
```

  title: Analytics rules plugin
  content: "The Analytics rules plugin extends the capabilities of Analytics Builder within Streaming Analytics. It allows users to create, deploy, and manage Analytics Builder models directly from device and group contexts in applications like Device Management and Cockpit."
---

### What is the Analytics rules plugin {#what-is-the-analytics-rules-plugin}
The Analytics rules plugin extends the Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage Analytics Builder model instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.

For more details about Analytics Builder, refer to [Analytics Builder](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#getting-started).

### Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

Before using the Analytics rules plugin, ensure that the following requirements are met:
- The tenant is subscribed to the Streaming Analytics microservice that supports the Analytics Builder capability.
- The Analytics rules plugin is installed in the desired application, and the feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` is enabled.

> - The user has the required privileges to access Analytics Builder models and create new instances of Analytics builder templated models. Refer to the [Permissions](/streaming-analytics/introduction-analytics/#permissions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The user has the required privileges to access Analytics Builder models and create new instances of Analytics builder templated models. Refer to [Permissions](/streaming-analytics/introduction-analytics/#permissions).
```

### Creating your first analytics rule {#creating-your-first-analytics-rule}

> This topic provides the basic workflow for creating your first analytics rule using the plugin from applications like Device Management. You will create a simple templated analytics model that creates an alarm when the temperature breaches a given threshold value. The steps below require that at least one device is already registered in {{< product-c8y-iot >}}. Preferably, this device is already sending measurement values to {{< product-c8y-iot >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic provides the basic workflow for creating your first analytics rule using the plugin from applications like Device Management. You will create a simple templated analytics model that creates an alarm when the temperature breaches a given threshold value. The steps below require that at least one device is already registered in {{< product-c8y-iot >}}. Preferably, this device already sends measurement values to {{< product-c8y-iot >}}.
```

The model that you add will contain three blocks:
- An input block which receives measurements from devices, groups, or assets.
- A threshold block which verifies the measurement has breached the threshold value.
- An alarm output block which creates an alarm object for specified devices, groups, or assets.

#### Step 1: Create an Analytics model {#create-an-analytics-model}

> This section walks you through creating a simple temperature monitoring model. For more detailed Analytics Builder information, refer to the [Understanding models](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#understanding-models).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section walks you through creating a simple temperature monitoring model. For more detailed Analytics Builder information, refer to [Understanding models](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#understanding-models).
```

1. Open the Streaming Analytics application and navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Models**.
2. On the top bar, click **New Model**, enter a model name (for example, "Create alarm on threshold") and click **OK**.
3. From the palette on the left, expand **Input** and drag the **Measurement Input** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

>    - For **Input Source**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown <img src="/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/option-template-parameter.png" alt="Option for selecting a template parameter" style="display:inline-block; margin:0">, then give a name to the template parameter. Example "Measurement Source".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Input source**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown <img src="/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/option-template-parameter.png" alt="Option for selecting a template parameter" style="display:inline-block; margin:0">, then provide a name. For example, "Measurement Source".
```

   ![Template parameter with From Context](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/select-tp-type.png)

>    - For **Fragment and Series**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a suitable name, example: Input Fragment and Series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Fragment and series**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name. For example: "Input Fragment and Series".
```

Author: @BeateRixen  The form field label in the application is **Fragment and Series**. Shouldn't we keep the form label consistent as **Fragment and Series** instead of changing it to **Fragment and series**?

4. Expand **Calculation** and drag the **Threshold** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

>    - For **Threshold Value**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name, example: "Threshold Value".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Threshold value**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name. For example: "Threshold Value".
```

> 5. Expand **Output** and drag the **Alarm Output** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Expand **Output** and drag the **Alarm output** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:
```

>    - For **Output Destination**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then use the same template parameter given for **Input Source** of the "Measurement Input" block, example: "Measurement Source".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Output destination**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then use the same template parameter given for **Input source** of the "Measurement input" block. For example: "Measurement Source".
```

>    - For **Alarm Type**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name, example:  "Alarm Type".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Alarm type**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name. For example:  "Alarm Type".
```

>    - For **Message**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name, example: "Alarm Text".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Message**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name. For example: "Alarm Text".
```

>    - For **Severity**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name, example: "Alarm Severity".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For **Severity**, select "Template parameter" from the dropdown, then provide a name. For example: "Alarm Severity".
```

6. Connect the blocks by clicking and dragging between their ports (small circles on the sides of blocks):

>    - Connect **Value** output of **Measurement Input** to **Value** input of **Threshold**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Connect the **Value** output of the **Measurement input** to the **Value** input of the **Threshold**.
```

>    - Connect **Breached** output of **Threshold** to **Create Alarm** input of **Alarm Output**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Connect the **Breached** output of the **Threshold** to the **Create alarm** input of  the **Alarm output**.
```

> 7. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input Source** of the **Measurement Input** block (example : "Measurement Source") has "Source or Destination" updated to include one or more values from the **Restrict to** dropdown (for example, Device) and set **Value Selection** to "From Context". Click **OK** to save the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input source** of the **Measurement input** block (example : "Measurement Source") has "Source or destination" updated to include one or more values from the **Restrict to** dropdown (for example, "Device") and set **Value selection** to "From context". Click **OK** to save the changes.
```

> For more details about "From Context" and **Restrict to**, refer to [Define template parameters](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#to-define-the-template-parameters-for-the-instances-of-the-current-model)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about "From context" and **Restrict to**, refer to [Define template parameters](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#to-define-the-template-parameters-for-the-instances-of-the-current-model)
```

![Template parameter with From Context](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/template-parameter.png)

For detailed information about creating and managing template parameters in Analytics Builder, refer to [Managing template parameters](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#managing-template-parameters).

8. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the model.

When completed, your model will look similar to this:

![Create model for alarms](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-alarm-model.png)

> #### Step 2: Create an instance of model using Analytics rules plugin {#create-an-instance-of-model-using-analytics-rules-plugin}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 2: Create model instance using Analytics rules plugin {#create-an-instance-of-model-using-analytics-rules-plugin}
```

> 1. Navigate to Device Management application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the Device Management application.
```

Author: done

2. Go to **Devices** > **All devices** and select a device.
3. Click the **Analytics rules** tab (embedded as one of the device details tabs).
Refer to the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) section to ensure all requirements are met.
   ![Analytics rule tab](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/empty-analytics-rule.png)

> 4. Click **Add rule** to open the **Add analytics rule** dialog. Since we are currently in the **Device** context, only models that have been configured with **From Context** template parameters restricted to **Device** will be visible here. Select your configured model and click **OK**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Click **Add rule** to open the **Add analytics rule** dialog. Since we are currently in the **Device** context, only models that have been configured with **From context** template parameters restricted to **Device** will be visible here. Select your configured model and click **OK**.
```

   ![Add rule for the selected model](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/add-rule-for-selected-model.png)
5. Configure the rule parameters:
   - Optionally update the name or add a note if desired.

>    - Populate the template parameter values. The value of the template parameter (for example, "Measurement Source") configured with **From Context** is derived automatically from the current device or group context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Populate the template parameter values. The value of the template parameter (for example, "Measurement Source") configured with **From context** is derived automatically from the current device or group context.
```

   - Click **Save** to save the rule, or toggle to **Active** to save and deploy immediately.
6. Your rule now appears in the Analytics rules list, showing its status (Active/Inactive).
   ![Analytics rules list](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/analytics-rules-list.png)

> **Congratulations!** You have successfully created and deployed your first analytics rule using the Analytics Rules plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Congratulations!** You have successfully created and deployed your first analytics rule using the Analytics rules plugin.
```

> ### Creating Analytics rule for existing samples {#create-analytics-rule-for-existing-samples}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating analytics rules for existing samples {#create-analytics-rule-for-existing-samples}
```

You can also create analytics rules using pre-built sample models from Analytics Builder. The process is similar to creating from scratch but faster since the model logic is already defined.

> #### Step 1: Create model from sample {#create-model-from-sample}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 1: Create a model from a sample {#create-model-from-sample}
```

> 1. Navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Samples** page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Samples**.
```

Author: done

2. Click the actions menu <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-menu-vertical text-muted icon-20"></i> of your desired sample (for example, "On alarm execute operation") and select **Create model from sample**.
   ![Create model from sample](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-model-from-sample.png)
3. The model editor opens with the sample model ready for use.

#### Step 2: Configure template parameters {#configure-template-parameters}
1. Click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> in the toolbar.

> 2. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input Source** of the **Alarm Input** block (for example, "Device or group of devices") has "Source or Destination" updated to include one or more values from the **Restrict to** dropdown (for example, Device) and set **Value Selection** to "From Context". Click **OK** to save the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input source** of the **Alarm input** block (for example, "Device or group of devices") has "Source or destination" updated to include one or more values from the **Restrict to** dropdown (for example, "Device) and set **Value selection** to "From context". Click **OK** to save the changes."
```

3. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the model.

> #### Step 3: Create rule from Device Management application {#create-rule-from-device-management-application}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 3: Create a rule from the Device Management application {#create-rule-from-device-management-application}
```

Author: updated

> Follow the same steps as described in [Step 2: Create an instance of model using Analytics rules plugin](#step-2-create-an-instance-of-model-using-analytics-rules-plugin) above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the same steps as described in [Step 2: Create model instance using the Analytics rules plugin](#step-2-create-an-instance-of-model-using-analytics-rules-plugin) above.
```

### Troubleshooting {#troubleshooting}

1. **No models available in Add rule dialog**

>    - Ensure that the Analytics Builder models have template parameters configured with the "From Context" value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Ensure that the Analytics Builder models have template parameters configured with the "From context" value.
```

>    - Verify your current context matches the model's "Source or Destination" type restrictions. For example, when in a device context where the model's **Restrict to** dropdown is configured with "Groups" only, that model will not be available. To appear in device contexts, "Device" must be selected in the **Restrict to** dropdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Verify your current context matches the model's "Source or destination" type restrictions. For example, when in a device context where the model's **Restrict to** dropdown is configured with "Groups" only, that model will not be available. To appear in device contexts, "Device" must be selected in the **Restrict to** dropdown.
```

---
weight: 10
title: Getting started with Analytics rules plugin
layout: redirect
outputs:
  - html
  - json
helpcontent:
- label: analytics-rules-plugin
  title: Analytics rules plugin
  content: "The Analytics rules plugin extends the capabilities of Analytics Builder within Streaming Analytics. It allows users to create, deploy, and manage Analytics Builder models directly from device and group contexts in applications like Device Management and Cockpit."
---

### What is Analytics Rules Plugin {#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin}
Analytics rules plugin extends Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage analytics builder instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.

For more details about Analytics Builder, please refer to [Analytics Builder](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#getting-started).

### Prerequisites

Before using the Analytics rules plugin, ensure that the following requirements are met:
- Tenant is subscribed to Streaming Analytics microservice that supports Analytics Builder capability.

> - Analytics rules plugin is installed to the desired application and feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Analytics rules plugin is installed to the desired application and feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` is enabled.
```

Author: added

The model that you add will contain three blocks:
- An input block which receives measurements from devices, groups, or assets.
- A threshold block which verifies the measurement has breached the threshold value.
- An alarm output block which creates an alarm object for specified devices, groups, or assets.

#### Step 1: Create an Analytics model

This section walks you through creating a simple temperature monitoring model. For more detailed Analytics Builder information, refer to the [Understanding models](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#understanding-models).

1. Open Streaming Analytics application and navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Models** page.
2. On the toolbar, click **New Model**, enter a model name (for example, "Create alarm on threshold breach") and click **OK**.
3. From the palette on the left, expand **Input** and drag the **Measurement Input** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

>    - For **Input Source**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter** <img src="/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/option-template-parameter.png" alt="Option for selecting a template parameter" style="display:inline-block; margin:0">, then enter "Threshold alarm for Devices".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Input Source**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter** <img src="/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/option-template-parameter.png" alt="Option for selecting a template parameter" style="display:inline-block; margin:0">, then give a name to the template parameter. Example "Measurement Source".
```

   ![Template parameter with From Context](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/select-tp-type.png)

>    - For **Fragment and Series**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then enter **Input Fragment and Series**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Fragment and Series**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a suitable name, example: **Input Fragment and Series**.
```

Author: done

4. Expand **Calculation** and drag the **Threshold** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

>    - For **Threshold Value**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then enter "Threshold Value".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Threshold Value**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example: "Threshold Value".
```

Author: done

5. Expand **Output** and drag the **Alarm Output** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor:

>    - For **Output Destination**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then select "Threshold alarm for Devices" from the dropdown.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Output Destination**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then use the same template parameter given for **Input Source** of the "Measurement Input" block, example: "Measurement Source".
```

Author: done

>    - For **Alarm Type**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then enter "Alarm Type".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Alarm Type**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example:  "Alarm Type".
```

Author: done

>    - For **Message**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then enter "Alarm Text".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Message**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example: "Alarm Text".
```

>    - For **Severity**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then enter "Alarm Severity".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - For **Severity**, click the value dropdown, select **Template parameter**, then provide a name, example: "Alarm Severity".
```

Author: done

6. Connect the blocks by clicking and dragging between their ports (small circles on the sides of blocks):
   - Connect **Value** output of **Measurement Input** to **Value** input of **Threshold**
   - Connect **Breached** output of **Threshold** to **Create Alarm** input of **Alarm Output**

> 7. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog. Ensure the template parameter **"Threshold alarm for Devices"** is configured by updating the "Source or Destination" type restriction to select one or more values from the dropdown (for example, Device) and setting **Value Selection** to "From Context". Click **OK** to save the changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog. Ensure the template parameter entry provided for **Input Source** of the "Measurement Input" block (example : "Measurement Source") has "Source or Destination" updated to include one or more values from the "Restrict to" dropdown (for example, Device) and set **Value Selection** to "From Context". Click **OK** to save the changes.
```

Author: done

#### Step 1: Create model from sample
1. Navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Samples** page.
2. Click the actions menu <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-menu-vertical text-muted icon-20"></i> of your desired sample (for example, "On alarm execute operation") and select **Create model from sample**.
   ![Create model from sample](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-model-from-sample.png)
3. The model editor opens with the sample model ready for use.

#### Step 2: Configure template parameters
1. Click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> in the toolbar.
2. Ensure the template parameter **"Device or group of devices"** is configured by updating the "Source or Destination" type restriction to select one or more values from the dropdown (for example, Device, Groups) and setting **Value Selection** to "From Context".
3. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the model.

#### Step 3: Create rule from Device Management application

> Follow the same steps as described in [Step 2: Create an instance of model using Analytics rules plugin](#step-4-create-analytics-rule-from-device-management-application) above.

Reviewer 3: please make sure the label `#step-4-create-analytics-rule-from-device-management-application` is pointing to the appropriate section

Author: updated

### Troubleshooting

1. **No models available in Add Analytics rule dialog**
   - Ensure Analytics Builder models have template parameters configured with "From Context" value selection.
   - Verify your current context matches the model's "Source or Destination" type restrictions.

2. **Previously created rules don't appear in the Analytics rules list**

>    - Verify rules are set to **Production mode** in the Analytics Builder instance editor.

Reviewer 3: isn't `instance name` also a pre-requisite?

Author: added

---
weight: 10
title: Getting started with Analytics Rules Plugin
layout: redirect
---

### What is Analytics Rules Plugin {#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin}

> The Analytics Rules plugin extends Analytics Builder's capabilities by enabling users to create and manage analytics rules directly from device and group contexts within applications like Device Management and Cockpit. Instead of switching between applications, users can create analytics rules from the context they are already working in, making the process more intuitive and efficient.

Reviewer 3: please use the content from the other PR

For more details about Analytics Builder, please refer to [Analytics Builder](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#getting-started).

### Prerequisites

Before using the Analytics Rules plugin, ensure that the following requirements are met:
- Tenant has subscribed to Streaming Analytics application and has access to Analytics Builder application.

> - Tenant has subscribed to host application (Device Management, Cockpit).

Reviewer 3: Analytics rules plugin is installed to the shell application and feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` enabled

Author: added

- Appropriate user permissions for analytics model access and rule creation. Please refer to the [Permissions](/streaming-analytics/introduction-analytics/#permissions).

### Creating your first analytics rule

> This topic provides the basic workflow for creating your first analytics rule using the plugin from host applications like Device Management. You will create a simple analytics model that creates an alarm when temperature breaches a given threshold value. The steps below require that at least one device is already registered in {{< product-c8y-iot >}}. Preferably, this device is already sending measurement values to {{< product-c8y-iot >}}.

Reviewer 3: is `host` or `shell` the correct term?

Author: updated to shell

The model that you add will contain three blocks:
- An input block which receives measurements from devices, groups, or assets.
- A threshold block which verifies the measurement has breached the threshold value.
- An alarm output block which creates an alarm object for specified devices, groups, or assets.

#### Step 1: Create an Analytics model

This section walks you through creating a simple temperature monitoring model. For more detailed Analytics Builder information, refer to the [Understanding models](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#understanding-models).

1. Open Streaming Analytics application and navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Models** page.
2. On the toolbar, click **New Model**, enter a model name (e.g., "Create alarm on threshold breach") and click **OK**.

> 3. From the palette on the left, expand **Input** and drag the **Measurement Input** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor, enter the Fragment and Series as **T=>C** (this refers to temperature measurements in Celsius from your device).

Reviewer 3: I would probably start by configuring all fields as template parameters
for measurement input, device selector and fragment/series should be defined as template parameter
for threshold block, value should be defined as template parameter
for alarm block, type, text and severity should be defined as template parameters

Author: done

> 4. Expand **Calculation** and drag the **Threshold** block onto the canvas. Enter a threshold value (e.g., 90) - this is the temperature limit that will trigger an alarm.

Reviewer 3: do not use short form words like `e.g.`, you need to use the full name `example`

Author: noted.

5. Expand **Output** and drag the **Alarm Output** block onto the canvas. In the block parameter editor, specify the Alarm Type as **c8y_Temperature**. Select the **severity** block parameter as **Major** from the dropdown list.
6. Connect the blocks by clicking and dragging between their ports (small circles on the sides of blocks):
   - Connect **Value** output of **Measurement Input** to **Value** input of **Threshold**
   - Connect **Breached** output of **Threshold** to **Create Alarm** input of **Alarm Output**
7. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the newly created model.

When completed, your model will look similar to this:

![Create model for alarms](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-alarm-model.png)

#### Step 2: Template parameter setup

> 1. To create rules for a model using the Analytics Rules plugin, proper template parameter configuration of the model is essential. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. To create rules for a model using the Analytics Rules plugin, the model has to be updated to use template parameters. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> to open the template parameter dialog.
```

Author: updated

2. Click **New template parameter** to add a template parameter and fill in the details:

>    - Enter **Name** (e.g., "Device context").

Reviewer 3: replace e.g with example

Author: done

>    - Enter **Name** (e.g., "Device context").

Reviewer 3: I would probably use some thing like `Threshold alarm for Devices`

Author: done

>    - Select **Type** as "Source or Destination" from the dropdown list.

Reviewer 3: some of this content needs to be changed if the template parameter is already defined at the time of model creation

   - Select **Restrict to** "Device".
   - Set **Value Selection** to "From Context".

![Template parameter with From Context](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/template-parameter.png)

3. Click **OK** to save and close the template parameter changes.

For a model to be available for rule creation in the plugin, it must have exactly one template parameter configured as follows:

| Property | Value |
|----------|-------|
| Type | Source or Destination |
| Value Selection | From Context |

- The template parameter **Type** must specifically be "Source or Destination".

> - When you select "Source or Destination" type, specify the context restrictions: Device, Groups, or both (multi-selectable). In our example, we selected only Device.

Reviewer 3: do not say both. this is supported for assets, others too

you can say one or more values can be selected

Author: updated

> For detailed information about creating and managing template parameters in Analytics Builder, refer to the [Managing Template Parameters documentation](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#managing-template-parameters).

Reviewer 3: you might have to move this to previous section if template parameters are created at the time of model creation.

Author: moved.

{{< c8y-admon-info>}}
Only one template parameter per model can have "From Context" value selection.
{{< /c8y-admon-info>}}

> #### Step 3: Update block parameters to use template parameter

Reviewer 3: this can be removed once the doc is updated to use template parameters at the time of model creation

Author: removed

1. In the canvas, select the **Measurement Input** block and update the first block parameter **Input Source** from type **Value** to **Template parameter**
   ![Select template parameter type](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/select-tp-type.png)
   and then click on the input field to select **Device context** from the dropdown.

2. Select the **Alarm Output** block and similarly update the first block parameter **Output Destination** from type **Value** to **Template parameter** and then click on the input field to select **Device context** from the dropdown.

3. In the toolbar of the model editor, click the save icon <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-save icon-20"></i> to save the model.

> #### Step 4: Create Analytics Rule from Device Management application

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Step 4: Create an instance of model using Analytics rules plugin
```

Author: updated

1. Navigate to **Device Management** application.
2. Go to **Devices** > **All devices** and select a device.

> 3. Click the **Analytics rules** tab (embedded as one of the device details tabs). You will see the empty analytics rules page.

Reviewer 3: you would need to point to the pre-requisites section here

Author: done

> 3. Click the **Analytics rules** tab (embedded as one of the device details tabs). You will see the empty analytics rules page.

Reviewer 3: remove the stuff about empty analytics rules page

Author: done

>    ![Analytics rule tab](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/empty-analytics-rule.png)

Reviewer 3: does the link in the screenshot here point to streaming analytics doc or the plugin doc? Please make sure it points to the plugin doc

Author: This requires code changes. I will work on it.

> 4. Click **Add rule** to open the Add analytics rule dialog box. Only models that have been configured with **From Context** template parameters restricted to **Device** will be listed. Select your configured model and click **OK**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Click **Add rule** to open the Add analytics rule dialog box. Since we are currently in the **Device** context, only models that have been configured with **From Context** template parameters restricted to **Device** will be visible here. Select your configured model and click **OK**.
```

Author: updated.

   ![Add rule for the selected model](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/add-rule-for-selected-model.png)
5. Configure the rule parameters:

>    - Update the rule name if needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - Update the name or add a note if desired.
```

Author: updated.

   - Click **Save** to save the rule, or toggle to **Active** to save and deploy immediately.
6. Your rule now appears in the Analytics rules list, showing its status (Active/Inactive).
   ![Analytics rules list](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/analytics-rules-list.png)

> **Congratulations!** You have successfully created and deployed your first analytics rule using the Analytics Rules plugin.

Reviewer 3: We might have to add a section for troubleshooting 

what happens if no models are displayed in the current context?

what should user do if there is an error in deployment?

Author: added

### Creating Analytics rule for existing samples

You can also create analytics rules using pre-built sample models from Analytics Builder. The process is similar to creating from scratch but faster since the model logic is already defined.

#### Step 1: Create model from sample
1. Navigate to **Analytics Builder** > **Samples** page.

> 2. Click the actions menu <i class="dlt-c8y-icon-menu-vertical text-muted icon-20"></i> of your desired sample (e.g., "On alarm execute operation") and select **Create model from sample**.

Reviewer 3: replace e.g. with example

   ![Create model from sample](/images/streaming-analytics/analytics-rules-plugin/create-model-from-sample.png)
3. The model editor opens with the sample model ready for use.

#### Step 2: Configure template parameters
1. Click the template parameter icon <i class="c8y-icon c8y-icon-parameters-on c8y-icon-duocolor icon-20"></i> in the toolbar.

> 2. Ensure one template parameter is configured with:

Reviewer 3: which one? we need to provide a bit more information

   - **Type**: Source or Destination
   - **Value Selection**: From Context

>    - **Restrict to**: Device, Groups, or both as needed

Reviewer 3: remove `or both`

---
weight: 10
title: Getting started with Analytics rules plugin
layout: redirect
---

### What is Analytics Rules Plugin {#what-is-analytics-rules-plugin}
Analytics rules plugin extends Analytics Builder capabilities within Streaming Analytics by enabling users to create and manage analytics builder instances directly from device and group contexts within applications such as Device Management and Cockpit.

For more details about Analytics Builder, please refer to [Analytics Builder](/streaming-analytics/analytics-builder/#getting-started).

### Prerequisites

Before using the Analytics rules plugin, ensure that the following requirements are met:

> - Tenant has subscribed to Streaming Analytics application and has access to Analytics Builder application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Tenant is subscribed to Streaming Analytics microservice that supports Analytics Builder capability.
```

> - Analytics rules plugin is installed to the shell application and feature flag streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Analytics rules plugin is installed to the shell application and feature flag `streaming-analytics.analytics-rules-plugin` enabled.
```

Author: done

---
weight: 10
title: Getting started with Analytics rules plugin
layout: redirect
outputs:
  - html
  - json
helpcontent:
- label: analytics-rules-plugin

>   title: Analytics rules

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  title: Analytics rules plugin
```
